docs: clarify guidance about designing Python modules (#1670)
canonical/operator: docs/howto/write-and-structure-charm-code.md

(design-your-python-modules)=
## Design your Python modules

> In your `src/charm.py` file, define a class for managing the charm's interface with Juju.

Reviewer: I realise this was there previously, but I wonder if we should avoid the word "interface", since that has a specific meaning in Juju. Maybe "interaction"?

Author: Great point. Changed in [`bb5d761`](https://github.com/canonical/operator/pull/1670/commits/bb5d761e3af516a6c73cf4aab53a7b33ce8a0024)

You'll have a single class that inherits from [](ops.CharmBase).
Arrange the methods of this class in the following order:

1. An `__init__` method that observes all relevant events and instantiates any objects that
   the charm needs.
   For example, in a Kubernetes charm:
   ```python
   def __init__(self, framework: ops.Framework):
       super().__init__(framework)
       framework.observe(self.on["workload_container"].pebble_ready, self._on_pebble_ready)
       self.container = self.unit.get_container("workload-container")
   ```
2. Event handlers, in the order that they're observed in `__init__`.
   Make the event handlers private.
   For example, `def _on_pebble_ready(...)` instead of `def on_pebble_ready(...)`.

> 3. Other helper methods, which can be public. If you're writing a charm that will be extended
>    by other charms, you could use private helper methods instead.

Reviewer 2: I feel like we could be clearer here what exactly we recommend and whether it matters.

Maybe we want something like:
```suggestion
3. Other helper methods, which should be public. If you're writing a charm class designed for subclassing
   by other charms, you should instead make all the methods that subclasses shouldn't rely on private.
```

I suggest waiting for Tony's recommendation on this one tho.

Reviewer: I feel like what we are trying to say is "other than event handlers, use your own judgement for public/private names". A charm class isn't intended for use in other code, so questions about what constitutes the public API don't really make sense, because there is no public API. For a machine/k8s base class, that's almost certainly within a team, so should be decided internally. For other special-cases like the 12 factor charms, they feel too specific to be called out here.

What about just not telling people how to name their other names? Do people need guidance on this?

workload, use the existing library instead of creating your own file.

### Example

Suppose that you're writing a machine charm to manage a workload called Demo Server.
Your charm code is in `src/charm.py`:

```python
#!/usr/bin/env python3
# Copyright 2025 User
# See LICENSE file for licensing details.

"""A machine charm that manages the server."""

import logging

import ops

import demo_server  # Provided by src/demo_server.py

logger = logging.getLogger(__name__)

class DemoServerCharm(ops.CharmBase):
    """Manage the server."""

    def __init__(self, framework: ops.Framework):
        super().__init__(framework)
        framework.observe(self.on.install, self._on_install)
        framework.observe(self.on.start, self._on_start)

    def _on_install(self, event: ops.InstallEvent):
        """Install the server."""
        demo_server.install()

    def _on_start(self, event: ops.StartEvent):
        """Handle start event."""
        self.unit.status = ops.MaintenanceStatus("starting server")
        demo_server.start()
        version = demo_server.get_version()
        self.unit.set_workload_version(version)
        self.unit.status = ops.ActiveStatus()

> 

Reviewer: I wonder if we should have a helper function here just to make the example more complete. I'm not sure what it would be, though.

Author: I agree, but I can't think of one either. I don't really want to artificially make the example harder to understand. What do you think about this comment that I just added?

```py
...

    def _on_start(self, event: ops.StartEvent):
        """Handle start event."""
        self.unit.status = ops.MaintenanceStatus("starting server")
        demo_server.start()
        version = demo_server.get_version()
        self.unit.set_workload_version(version)
        self.unit.status = ops.ActiveStatus()

    # Put helper methods here.
    # If a method doesn't depend on Ops, put it in src/demo_server.py instead.

if __name__ == "__main__":  # pragma: nocover
    ops.main(DemoServerCharm)
```

Reviewer: Sure, looks good.
